[blog] htmx blog (#109)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/htmx.md

---

> title: htmx

Reviewer: try to find a title that is a bit more descriptive and draws the attention of the reader

authorName: Niraj Acharya
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/122071597?v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/nirajacharya2

> createdAt: Sep 29, 2023

Reviewer: please update the date to current date before publishing

tags: js, html, go, htmx

> banner: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JankariTech/blog/master/src/imgs/fallback_banner.png

Reviewer: maybe replace this with something more specific relating to your blog post?

Reviewer: that should be fine. you could add the link to this github repo and the official documentation at the end of the blog as declaration of source and for further reference for the readers.

---

> Htmx is ui library written in JavaScript that extends the features of html. It can be extended to make AJAX requests, do CSS transitions, connect to WebSockets and handle Server Sent Events inside a html document with just some delacritive html attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Htmx is an UI library written in JavaScript that extends the features of html. It can be extended to make AJAX requests, do CSS transitions, connect to WebSockets and handle Server Sent Events inside a html document with just some declarative html attributes.
```
for "delacritive", I'm not sure if my suggestion is what you wanted to say...

> Htmx is ui library written in JavaScript that extends the features of html. It can be extended to make AJAX requests, do CSS transitions, connect to WebSockets and handle Server Sent Events inside a html document with just some delacritive html attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
htmx is ui library written in JavaScript that extends the features of html. It can be extended to make AJAX requests, do CSS transitions, connect to WebSockets and handle Server Sent Events inside a html document with just some delacritive html attributes.
```

if htmx is generally written with a small h, you can also use small h at the beginning of a sentence because it's a name. putting names in _italic_ or using quote like this `htmx` helps the reader to better understand what are names or commands within a text

> Htmx was created by Carson Gross in 2013 because he found html to be limited for what he was trying to achieve. Those limitations of html htmx tries to solve are:

Reviewer: the last sentence is a bit difficult to understand

```suggestion
Htmx was created by Carson Gross in 2013 because he found html to be limited for what he was trying to achieve. Those limitations of html, which htmx tries to solve, are:
```
or

```suggestion
Htmx was created by Carson Gross in 2013 because he found html to be limited for what he was trying to achieve.  htmx tries to solve the following limitations of html:
```

- only `<a>` and `<form>` tags are able to make HTTP requests
- only `click` & `submit` events trigger them
- only `GET` & `POST` methods are available
- and when using `<a>` and `<form>` the whole screens gets replaced

In this blog, we will learn how htmx enhances html and overcomes the limitations mentioned above.

## Installing htmx

> We can simply install htmx by adding a script tag in our html.

Reviewer: I probably wouldn't call this "installing", rather something like "using" or "making use of" the htmx library...

```html
<head>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/htmx.org@1.9.5"></script>
</head>
```

> Htmx claims to be small (~14k min.gz’d), dependency-free, extendable, IE11 compatible & 67% less code when compared with react

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Htmx claims to be small (~14k min.gz’d), dependency-free, extendable, IE11 compatible & 67% less code when compared with react.
```

> Now let's see how to make a simple ajax request in htmx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's see how to make a simple ajax request in htmx.
```

In English, there is always a punctuation mark at the end of a full sentence :)
However in bullet point lists or titles where you don't have a full sentence, no point is needed

## making AJAX request (GET)

> First, let's make an endpoint to get data from and i will be using go for this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, let's make an endpoint to get data from and I will be using go for this
```

```go
func getRoot(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    http.ServeFile(w, r, "./static/index.html")
}

func hi(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    io.WriteString(w, "<div>hi</div>")
}
func main() {

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    http.HandleFunc("/", getRoot)
    http.HandleFunc("/hello", hi)
    http.ListenAndServe(":3333", nil)
}
```

> In the above code example, we made 2 endpoints. `/` to serve the html file and `/hello` will return a html element. all htmx does is get the body of the response and render it on the page so we have to return html in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above code example, we made 2 endpoints. `/` to serve the html file and `/hello` will return a html element. htmx gets the body of the response and renders it on the page, therefore the response of our function should be some html code.
```

I'm not sure if I understand the last part of the sentence properly. Do you want to say the the output needs to be an HTML code snippet?

> Now to use the `hello` endpoint in html

Reviewer: this is not a full sentence...

```suggestion
Now we will see how to use the `hello` endpoint in html:
```

```html
<div hx-post="/hello">hello</div>
```

> [demo](https://i.imgur.com/BidNTh3.gif)

Reviewer 2: best to place the images also in this repo

Reviewer: it should be possible, have a look at https://stackoverflow.com/questions/34341808/is-there-a-way-to-add-an-animated-gif-to-a-markdown-file

> As seen above the endpoint is working and the response is shown properly in the hello example.
> Here clicking the hello text will send a request that is because we did not define any event that will trigger the ajax request.

Reviewer 2: I found it a bit hard to read, just a suggestion how to rephrase:

```suggestion
As seen above the endpoint is working. The content of the `div` is replaced by the response.
Because we did not define any specific event to trigger the ajax request it will be triggert by clicking the `hello` text.
```

> Here clicking the hello text will send a request that is because we did not define any event that will trigger the ajax request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on the hello text here will directly send a request. This is because we did not define any event that will trigger the ajax request.
```

I'm not sure if you want to say that using a ajax request is the proper / better way to do this...

> We can explicitly define it like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can explicitly define it like this:
```

```html
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click">hello</div>
```

> Htmx has other predefined events like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Htmx has other predefined events like
```
```suggestion
Htmx has other predefined events like:
```

- `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` triggers when the mouse enters the element

> - `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` triggers when the mouse enters the element and won't trigger after that

Reviewer 2: so will `mouseenter` trigger every time when the mouse enters and exits and enters again or will it retrigger as long as the mouse is in the element?

> - `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` triggers when the mouse enters the element
> - `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` triggers when the mouse enters the element and won't trigger after that
> - `hx-trigger="click[ctrlKey]"` triggers when the element is clicked while holding the `Ctrl` key
> - `hx-trigger="every 2s"` triggers every two seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` is triggered when the mouse enters the element
- `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` is triggered when the mouse enters the element for the first time and won't trigger after that
- `hx-trigger="click[ctrlKey]"` is triggered when the element is clicked while holding the `Ctrl` key
- `hx-trigger="every 2s"` is triggered every two seconds
```

> You can find more on the htmx docs.

Reviewer 2: maybe link the docs?
```suggestion
You can find more on the htmx [docs](the URL of the docs).
```

> You can find more on the htmx docs.

Reviewer: It would be nice for the reader if you add the link to the docs here :)

> You can find more on the htmx docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more on this subject in the htmx docs.
```

> Currently, it replaces the element that makes the ajax request similar to the trigger event we have a `hx-target` attribute

Reviewer: what does "it" stand for in this sentence? is this referring to your sample project? It's easier for the reader if you specify this...

Currently our code replaces...

> Currently, it replaces the element that makes the ajax request similar to the trigger event we have a `hx-target` attribute
> That specifies which element is going to get replaced

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, our example replaces the element that makes the ajax request, but we can specify which element is going to get replaced using the `hx-target` attribute:
```

> Currently, it replaces the element that makes the ajax request similar to the trigger event we have a `hx-target` attribute
> That specifies which element is going to get replaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, it replaces the element that makes the ajax request. Similar to the trigger event we have a `hx-target` attribute, that specifies which element is going to get replaced.
```

Reviewer: for the reader it's nice if you comment on what is demonstrated in the code example. For example:

```suggestion
Currently, it replaces the element that makes the ajax request similar to the trigger event we have a `hx-target` attribute
That specifies which element is going to get replaced. In the example below we use `#relpace` as target.
```

```html
<div id="relpace" class="replace"></div>

> <div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="#relpace">hello</div>

Reviewer 2: is `relpace` the correct name or a typo?

```

> We can also use class like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also use a class name like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target
```

> We can also use class like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use class like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target.
```

For example:
If we have two elements `foo`

```html
<foo id="1" class="replace"></foo>
<foo id="2" class="replace"></foo>
<bar hx-post="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="foo">hello</bar>
```

> It swaps the first of the `foo` element with `id=1`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first of the `foo` elements will be taken as target. So this example will swap
 element with `id=1`.
```

## making a todo app
Since we learned a bit of basic let's write a todo app.

> First start with making a submit form for adding a todo task

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First start with making a submit form for adding a todo task.
```

> For that, we will only need an input box and a button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For that, we will only need an input box and a button:
```

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
    hx-swap="beforeend"
  >
    <input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

> Now on the server

Reviewer 2: on which server? Is this extending your go code from above or is a new thing?

```go
func save(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    r.ParseForm()
    storeTODO(r.FormValue("task")) // save to database
    tastList := "<div>" + r.FormValue("task") + " </div>"
    io.WriteString(w, tastList)
}

func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", save)
    ...
}
```

> [demo](https://i.imgur.com/wmTHPYD.gif)

Reviewer 2: this image is not available

Reviewer: url seems to work for me

In the above html, the form will send a post request to `/save` endpoint and htmx will replace the content in the div with the id `todo-list` but the whole content will be replaced.

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what will be replaced by what?
- will the content of the div (`id=todo-list`) replaced by something?
- will the content of the div replaces by a div with the id `todo-list`?
- what is the "whole content"?

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding another

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

> Instead, we want to only append the new todo item after the last todo item. so we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. the `beforeend` value will append the html response before the end of the targeted element

Reviewer 2: ether the `.` are end of sentence then the first word after that should be written with a capital letter or they should be `,`.

> Instead, we want to only append the new todo item after the last todo item. so we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. the `beforeend` value will append the html response before the end of the targeted element

Reviewer 2: `hx-swap` is used in your original example, so what is different now?

After the swap attribute

(adding item 1)

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding another item (item 2)

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

> But if we refresh the page we won't get the list of tasks we saved so we need to get the list
> For that, we need to make a get request

Reviewer 2: You are saying the same thing twice: the list is not loaded => we need to load the list
```suggestion
But on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks will not be shown.
To make that work, we need to make a `GET` request.
```

```html
<div id="todo-list" hx-get="/taskList" hx-trigger="load"></div>
```

> Here we need to get the list when someone opens/loads the page so we give the trigger value of `load`. which will trigger when the page is load

Reviewer 2: - dot or comma?
- where is "here"?

> ```go

Reviewer 2: where am I suppose to add this code?

func listTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    tastList := getTODO() // gets data from database and returns html
    io.WriteString(w, tastList)
}
func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", listTask)
    ...
}
```
[demo](https://i.imgur.com/yMVvdP3.gif)

Now the list is shown even when the page is refreshed.

> For edit let's try some thing different.

Reviewer 2: why? what different?

> First let's make clicking on the todo item go to a different page.

Reviewer 2: who will go to a different page? the item?

For that, we need to get an anchor tag instead of a div with the todo text inside a div

**example response from server**

```htmx
  <div hx-boost="true">
      <a href="/task/asdasda">asdasda</a>
  </div>
```

Here the `hx-boost` attribute will replace the body element and add the previous page to the history entry which will allow you to go back if needed.

[demo](https://imgur.com/bktyFpm)

> For the actual editing, it will be similar to other examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the actual editing, it will be similar to the other examples.
```

```html
<div>

>   <div>asdasda</div>

Reviewer 2: find a better name for that string. what is that about?

  <form id="myForm2" hx-put="/edit" hx-target="#app">
    <input type="text" name="task" required="" />
    <input type="hidden" name="old" value="asdasda" />
    <input type="submit" value="edit" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Now let's perform deletion on the list.

First, we have to make a delete button.

For that, I will update the list template and add a delete form

```html
<div hx-boost="true" class="new-element">
  <a href="/task/dasdas">dasdas</a>
  <form
    hx-trigger="click"
    hx-delete="/delete"
    hx-target="closest .new-element"
    hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"
  >
    <input type="hidden" name="task" value="dasdas" />
    delete
  </form>
</div>
```

> Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to other examples. but in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute i added an extra value . All that value does is delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because i want to do a css animation during that time.

Reviewer 2: - `the other examples`
- i => capital
- dot or comma?
- does the `value` do it or the key, or the parameter?

```css

> .htmx-swapping {

Reviewer 2: what to do with that code?

  opacity: 0;
  transition: opacity 1s ease-out;
}
```

> While htmx is doing the swapping of the element htmx adds `htmx-swapping` class to the element that is being swapped. now the above css will give the swapped element a fading effect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While htmx is doing the swapping of the element it also adds the `htmx-swapping` class to the element and the above css will give the swapped element a fading effect.
```

[demo](https://i.imgur.com/khdzEgM.gif)

## WebSockets

> Currently, if we add a todo task to our list it won't be shown to another tab/browser opening the same page which can be achieved using websockets fortunately htmx supports websockets.

Reviewer 2: I think that are multiple sentences.

Let's first make a connection to a websocket.

```html
<div id="ws" hx-ws="connect:/ws" hx-trigger="task"></div>
```

The `hx-ws` attribute takes the websocket endpoint and makes a connection to it.

```go

> import(

Reviewer 2: I'm again not clear about where to put this code
